Hello and welcome.
Let's continue our discussion on design principles and strategies and talk about the Single Responsibility
Principle mainly all about cohesion highly cohesive objects basically this principle states that every
class should have responsibility over a single part of the functionality provided by the software the
responsibility should be entirely encapsulated by the class all its methods should be narrowly aligned
with that responsibility.
A class should only have one job.
Again as I mentioned cohesion a single focus do not want a class that's doing five thousand things.
Much harder to maintain.
A very simple principle a class should have a single responsibility where responsibility is nothing
but a reason to change should make sure that one class at the most responsible for doing one task or
functionality among the whole set of responsibilities that it has only when there is a change need in
that specific task or functionality should this class be changed.
You're limiting your amount of changes to a particular class and you're following encapsulation.
Now you may ask yourself OK well what if I have a simple operation writing data to writing output to
the screen.
Should I only have one on one method.
It doesn't mean that you can still have more than one method.
It's just the single task is printing or displaying output but you have variations of that display of
output.
So just like in Java when you have the system thought out that print line print line is the method and
the system dot out in the out.
I'll class or one of the string classes but it has variations of that print line method but it still
has one task right.
It's focused on displaying output.
So in this case don't just think of task as one single method it's closely related to the concepts of
coupling cohesion.
As I mentioned because of taillight cohesive it also is reduced.
It has a reduction in coupling it's very loosely coupled because it doesn't you know doesn't have other
dependencies has a similar responsibility.
Coupling is the degree of independence between software classes or methods.
We should know this by now but I haven't provided a formal definition.
So here's a good time.
It's a measure of how closely connected two classes are two methods are doesn't just mean objects dependencies.
It also can mean dependency between methods systems that use like global a lot of global variables tend
to be tightly coupled encapsulation can help reduce the coupling but you can help us still have tightly
coupled systems.
If you know if you have a lot of different objects to composition or all sorts of other things so coupling
just again measures that degree of relationships the strength of relationships between classes.
Low coupling means small dependencies between classes and methods.
What that means is it's easier to change code without introducing bugs in other classes or other methods.
It's very very basic you know if when you have a lot of dependencies obviously when you make a change
one spot it's going to cascade.
You can limit that to the amount of cascading when you have low coupling tight coupling means two classes
or two methods are closely connected.
A change in one module method may affect another module module term is also used interchangeably a lot
with with methods components classes.
It's a more generic term.
Cohesion refers to what the class or method can do.
Its focus its responsibility really low cohesion would mean that the class does a great variety of actions
all over the place.
Your class is getting input from the user it's performing five or six different algorithms.
Maybe it does some drawing or graphical stuff.
Maybe it doesn't network connections all sorts of things.
New programmers tend to create one huge gigantic class for everything and it just does way too much.
When you have this low cohesion it's just unfocused.
It's very broad.
It's usually very generic.
It doesn't have the specificity to it.
Hi cohesion means that the class is focused.
It knows what it should be doing.
It has a single responsibility.
It only contains methods related to the attention of the class.
You know you don't have a car class and then the car class does.
Motorcycle stuff just won't make sense.
The Single Responsibility Principle is about limiting the impact of change by designing loosely low
couple classes that are highly cohesive.
OK so both of these big terms are are used to the responsibility principle and mainly again to impact
the amount of change when you do have change.
You don't have to change a million different files or million different classes some examples of responsibilities
that classes have that may need to be separated out into other classes.
Persistence saving data things like that.
Maybe if you have specific functionality for persistence whether it's persisting through a database
or a file or something like that separate that out validation validation code can be separated out as
well.
Notifications error handling logging.
These are all specific tasks that can be contained to their own class.
Class selection instantiation creation of objects will look at a lot of design patterns to do that formatting
formatting is usually somewhat complicated and can do many different options so that will be in its
own class passing passing and even parsers and compilers.
Again they tend to be somewhat complicated.
Whether you're passing an entire language grammar or something like that or if you're just passing text
on a file it's definitely good to separate that out and mapping would be another example.
So common examples as of some functionality in programming that you would want to separate out and have
its own focus.
Now let me demonstrate in intelligence.
An example of a class that's not following a single responsibility and then how we can refactor it change
it so that it is
let's bring up until a J.
We're just gonna create a simple employee class employee in a company.
Employees usually have some attributes related to their name and address.
They may have information on when they join the company.
Things like that.
It's a basic class but when I first create it I want to show you how basically breaks the Single Responsibility
Principle because it's just doing too many things.
So we'll name This name the single responsibility.
Example K our public class employee.
Gonna have some attributes related to employees things like employee I.D. name address and so forth.
We want to make our attributes private for good encapsulation so an employee I.D..
Let's just
have a name
and address
and then we also have a date
with a copper methods in here such as a method as intensive boolean.
Just a is promotion.
Do this year.
We're not going to have any real behavior inside this.
We're just going to say this has some promotional logic.
Again I'm just trying to demonstrate the single responsibility so it's not important to demonstrate
method logic right because we know we know how to create methods and in Java of another one just for
calculating income tax
for the current year
and not doing much.
We'll have some income tax logic and then we probably also have some getters and setters getters and
setters for all of our member variables.
I could go up and generate some getters and setters if I wanted to but
we're good for now we're just gonna say there's a bunch of getters and setters.
So you'll see this class right.
We have some stuff going on.
It looks logically correct.
Right.
We have some member variable and so forth that has all the employee attributes like the name age I.D.
date of joining an address.
It tells you if the employee is eligible for promotion this year it calculates income tax he has to
pay for the year however this class breaks the single responsibility principle the logic of determining
whether the employee is due a promotion this year is not a responsibility which the employee owns right.
Usually that's the company's H.R. department.
They all the responsibility based on the company's H.R. policies and that can change every few years
so when any H.R. policy changes the Employee class now needs to be updated so that it currently has
a responsibility because it has currently has responsibility promotion determination.
Can you see how that could be a problem.
This really should be owned by the employee because promotions are owned by H.R..
Those change frequently in H.R..
Now you have to update the Employee class.
Same goes for the income tax calculation.
That's not a responsibility of an employee class.
That's a Finance Department responsibility.
The Finance Department is going to take care of the current tax structure.
And again that may get updated every year so every time you update the current tax structure now you
have to update the employee right.
So it's not a single responsibility policy here.
This class is just not following it.
It's not conducive to change.
Every time things change for you have to change in this class.
The class really should have the single responsibility of maintaining core attributes of only an employee.
So what I'd like to do is I'd like to refactor the Employee class so that it adheres to the Single Responsibility
Principle.
First thing we need to do is we need to move the promotion determining logic from an employee class
to an H.R. promotions class.
So let's do that first we'll create a new class and we'll name it H.R. promotions.
Now again this is going to have much it's just going to have our promotions here and we'll basically
just copy this change it a bit but we're moving the responsibility out of H.R. promotions into the H.R.
promotions class.
Right.
And the way we would want to do this is we'd have the same method name.
But what we do is we just have to take an employee object so we can say employee.
And so now the promotion logic the implementation
is using the employee
information passed in
right.
We can create another class that removes that
functionality for calculating the income tax.
So here we can just call it and finance
calculations.
How about just the finance class finance and again in here we're going to eventually move things from
the employee but for now we'll just copy it and finance we'll have our calculated income tax for the
current year.
And again this will take a employee object.
And you would perform operations on the Employee object.
Right.
So this is going to implement the tax logic using the employee past in
pretty straightforward.
So far we basically removed responsibilities an employee in separate out into separate classes.
So now we can remove those functions methods.
I should say sorry.
Sometimes I use terminology now.
All the Employee class has is its attributes that are relevant.
Employee Name address and date of joining right now.
The Employee class adheres to the Single Responsibility Principle.
It does not have all these different responsibilities for getting the tax calculations or determining
promotions.
Right.
So now that means when those things change which they're constantly going to be changing those are not
we don't have to update Employee class we can just apply to other classes.
And that is the single responsibility program in a nutshell.
Again we will be using this quite a bit in the design patterns we go into detail but this is a very
basic example.
Thank you.